Okay, the tape is rolling.
You don't go to conventions. I noticed in Locust that you finally went to one. I
didn't regard that as a convention. Okay, would you just prefer not to meet the
fans personally, or is it just kind of you're happy where you're doing, you
don't especially like to travel? No, it's a very simple answer that nobody
believes. I don't like to travel. Way, way back, I was born in England. I lived
a year in Spain. I came to this country until I was a teenager. I never spent
more than two years in any one place. I finally spent four years. That was at
boarding school in high school. And when I finally got married and settled down,
I said, I don't want to move. Well, I was eligible for the draft. I got moved
again in the Army, you know, two years back and forth. But when I finally got
where I wanted to be, which was warm, it was in Florida, so I settle down and I
don't like to move. I just don't do it voluntarily. I'm too used to being
uprooted in childhood, so that it's just a dislike for travel. Locally I go and
I address the classes of my daughters in school. I don't have any trouble with
this. It does take time, and, of course, my time is valuable, but I like to meet
people, especially when they're talking about my work. That's all. It's easy to
do. But going to a convention would mean, oh, a week or so of my time. That is,
I would have to prepare. I would have to get an airplane or drive. I would have
to come back. I would have to catch up on my sleep. I mean, all in all, it would
be about a week gone even if it were only a three-day convention. When you
figure the preparation time and the recovery time and the travel time, a week of
my time these days is worth a couple thousand dollars. and I have to think, is
this worth this amount to me to go and meet a few people? Well, it depends on
the people. I went to this SF Research Association meeting in Kansas for two
reasons. One, I wanted to give my other daughter some experience. I mentioned
I'd taken one daughter when she was 18, well, when she was 12, it was her turn
to go somewhere and do something, get a ride in the airplane, have some
experience away from home that was really meaningful. but also they happen to
have at that meeting Theodore Sturgeon whose work I've admired since I started
reading science fiction they had Frederick Poe who I think may be the best
writer in the genre today they had Jack Williamson who was the author of the
very first science fiction novel in the first magazine I read introduced they
had James Gunn who wrote one of my favorite all time stories In other words,
they had about four people there whose work I had really admired. And that was
enough to make me, well, if I could meet them all at one time, you see, that
made it pay. I went there to meet the people. I did meet them. I complimented
them on their work. People asked me for autographs. I never asked. I don't care
about signatures, but I took Sturgeon's More Than Human, my 35-cent copy,
battered and dates from the 50s, brought it to him, asked him to sign it. It's
the only autograph I ever thought or probably ever will seek, simply as a
gesture because of admiration for this man's work. So I went. I didn't regard it
as a convention. I guess it took on some convention aspects, but I went because
it was a meeting where several people I wanted to meet were. I did meet them.
Now that I've met them, I don't need to meet them again, and I'd probably be
years before I go anywhere again.
your statement at the first saying how much money would lose in a week prompted
one of our people to ask do you do anything for relaxation so i'll broaden the
question what kind of schedule do you work five days seven days a week how many
hours a day people often ask me that and i have a standard answer i work all the
time that my family will let me i see we have Horses and dogs feed the horses.
Chores in the morning take half an hour before. I get up at six and about a
quarter or seven. Then I can settle down to my breakfast. So that I don't have
all the time of the day. I get about six hours a day, seven days a week. So it
comes out close to a 40-hour week working time. I try to read a little around
the edges. And if I have to answer correspondence, it comes out of that time.
and the rest of the time has taken just in the business of living, of with
horses and just reading the mail that comes in, eating and so on. So that even
so, I'm fairly well paid now. This is a recent vintage. I mean, I earn a lot
more now than I used to. You'll forget that I sold my first story in 1962. It
was published in 1963. I earned $20 for it. My first year of writing, I earned
$160. So I had all those lean years before I worked up the fat years, where now
I do earn a good amount I regarded as balancing out the earlier years. If you
took my whole career as a writer, it would not be such a phenomenal income, just
that I didn't get it earlier and then I do get it now. But, of course, if I go
somewhere now, it comes out of what I'm earning now so that's the way I have to
figure it. Any chance with your schedule and with the number of books you've
written lately you could get burned down on writing? Well, I wondered when, did
you see my novel Viscous Circle in the author's notes? Yes, I read that. That's
about as close as I've come, and that was an illness. That I was trying to write
a novel and I had a month-long fever, and I wasn't suffering pain, but always
with the illness. You know, I don't know where it's going. The doctor couldn't
do anything. I mean, you know, is this leading to death, or is it just a minor
thing? I had no way of knowing. It reacquainted me with my own mortality, and
somewhat shook me up, and I just didn't see the world the same way after that.
And so I had to take stock and say, what do I really want to do? And I had
serious doubt whether I wanted to continue to write science fiction. That would
extend to fantasy also. The thing about fantasy is so easy and so much fun that
while I'm in doubt, I can simply do it and make money. I didn't take nearly as
much of a conscious decision there because my guts aren't in the fantasy so
much. It is less important to me. It's more important financially, but it's less
important in terms of my life's work. See what I mean? So I just had to think
about it. But as it turned out, when I found a way to stretch the boundaries to
include the new themes that I wanted to work on with inside the genre of science
fiction, then it's fine, and I go right ahead and write. So at Burnout, I don't
think so. I don't suffer from writer's block, and I doubt that I'll suffer from
burnout. I still have more ideas to write than I have time to write. I have a
couple other projects I want to do, and I can't make time for them. I'm so busy
with the paying writing.
It appears that along in late 1977, I guess when the cluster books came out and
then A Spell for Chameleon was pretty soon after that, that you just exploded as
far as your productivity. You'd put up, oh, one or two novels a year for the
previous years, and then all of a sudden just a whole lot of novels. What
happened then? That's not actually true. You see, I mentioned before I was
getting blacklisted. I could only sell a portion of what I wrote. I was writing
it. I piled up eight novels unsold so that in the 70s, say 50% of my output was
getting into print. But when I finally got through that, I finally became
apparent to some of these publishers that I was the one that was right, you see.
See, the word was being spread by the blacklisters how difficult a writer I was
to deal with and don't deal with this guy and so on. It's just nothing but
trouble. When I finally, when that passed and I got to working with editors who
knew me personally and knew it wasn't so, then I could sell everything I wrote.
So now you're seeing everything I write, and it looks like an explosion, but I
always was writing at that pace. I just couldn't get it into print. I still have
several novels. I'm sold, and I have stories. I don't write them anymore, but at
one point I assembled a whole volume, over 100,000 words, just of my own soul
stories. Put it together, I called it Anthonology, a pun on my name in
Anthology. Tried to sell it that way, couldn't. So the answer is you're just
seeing my work. Now actually I probably am more productive now than I was, but
that's not a case of doing three times as much, it's a case of doing perhaps 50%
more. Over the years, I've gotten more experience so that I'm just more
efficient at writing. I also have more time. My daughters are now teenagers
instead of in the twos and threes, and it takes me less time. I don't need to
worry about taking care of them. They're off at school, and I have time to write
so that my
situation has gradually changed.
All right, let's see. I've lost track again. Did I answer your question? Yeah,
that pretty much answers that. It really wasn't an explosion. An explosion is
more apparent than real. I do do about a third of a million words a year, but I
always was a fairly prolific writer. I'm a slow writer, but I write all the time
so that I get a lot done. Do you type your first draft or handwrite it and then
type it or what? Handwrite it. And that dates from when my—I used to type it
back in the 1960s, but when my first child was born in 1967, my wife was out
working because I didn't learn enough writing to support us. And so I took care
of my baby girl, changing her diapers and all this. And that played havoc with
my writing, because I couldn't settle down at a typewriter. she was hyperactive,
and she wouldn't let me out of her sight. So for a while I tried typing, having
the, I forget what you call it, a bassinet sort of little cradle I put in my
lap, and as long as I typed, she would be satisfied. But then if I stopped to
think, she would wake up and start fussing. So I had to shift from the
typewriter. I couldn't work that way. So I went to a pencil and clipboard, and I
could literally drop the clipboard and grab her before she hit the ground if she
was falling. Once she got over that stage, I found it so much more useful to be
able to write with a clipboard that I just continued, because now I write, my
wife drives, and I simply sit there and write. I can't read while driving, I get
car sick. But I don't have to see, I don't have to read what I'm writing, you
see, I just need to see my place so I can write while driving. So on a
clipboard, when I went to Kansas, I wrote several hundred words in the air, you
know, writing in the airplane. I just had my clipboard there. It would be hard
to do with a typewriter. So it was just so versatile that I just continued it,
and now I do all of my writing in pencil on the clipboard. Then for the second
draft, I type it, get an idea of what I have, and then I type it again for the
form of submission draft. My creative work is done in pencil now. You seem to
stick almost completely to novels. You don't seem to have had as many short
stories as a lot of people, and you do write the novels. Are you comfortable in
a short story form as well? This is another change that was dictated by
economics. I was comfortable in the short story form and in the novelette form.
I only sold one out of four that I did, and that was when I was earning $1,000 a
year from writing. I mean, it wasn't enough. Inflation has changed things. This
is back in the 60s, but I needed more than that. I hear this interference again.
You can hear me? Yeah, I can hear you fine. I think we'll be able to filter it
out, so just go on. I had to learn to do novels. They were not my natural form.
I had a great deal of difficulty. I had to work. My career has really gone
through a stair-step series of things I described, shifting to the pencil and
paper, so I could keep on working. Well, learning to do the novel, I did it
because it was the only way I would be able to earn my living. And unless I
could eventually earn my living in writing, I couldn't afford to continue doing
it. I mean, my wife was working to support me. That's okay. She understood. But
I wanted to get on my feet and not be dependent. dependent, you might say,
forever. Of course, later on, when I started earning more, her full income was
going just to pay the tax on mine. She finally had to quit working. She couldn't
afford to, really. But in the early days, it wasn't that way. So I was able to
support my family once I shifted to novels. But the first novel that I got into
print, 2nd, the phone, was very meticulously pieced together in much smaller
elements. It actually divides up into about 36 small parts, carefully put
together, because I couldn't just start at the beginning and do a novel through
to the end. The second one I worked on was this Arabian
Night's Fantasy adaptation of Hassan. I had the storyline there from the classic
story you see, so it was as though somebody else had designed it i collaborated
with a well couldn't even say a dead man i mean this story had been in the uh
circulation for many centuries uh i did a couple of collaborations with other
people and finally with my novel macroscope i did one big novel unified all the
way through it was always conceived as a big novel and after that i knew i had
mastered the novel form i didn't worry about it anymore but that's it was hard
the novel was not my natural form I guess it is now but I had to acquire that
taste had I had my own way I would have stayed in the stories and the novelettes
but again so much of my life has been dictated by economic considerations I wish
it were not so I would rather have been the kind of writer that the critics
applaud or highly literary writer that doesn't have to worry about, uh, things
like food and rent, mortgage, but, uh, I always have had to consider the
economic aspect. So it was economics that put me into novels. Once I got there,
I found I liked it. And now, uh, I have really very little interest. Um, I did
last month do a story upon request, a fantasy story before that time, I think
I'd done 15 novels in the 100,000 word category. And then, purely as another
fanzine, an amateur magazine, had asked for 50-word stories. That's 50 words,
half a hundred. I did three of those. So I did 100,000 words for 50 words and
nothing in between for the past five or six years.
you mentioned a while ago that you had gotten your bachelor's degree in writing
when did you at what point in your life did you decide to be a writer when i was
two years in college uh at 1954 i had i'd gone through i said it was eight years
it started with six years it started i'd taken courses through four years of
high school and through two years of college and decided what I wanted to major
in, I said, I really can't do it in art, and I'm not good enough. You see, the
difference between a commercial, somebody can sell as art. I mean, I was a good
artist for the average man on the street, but to sell it, I just didn't think I
was that good. I said, well, then what am I going to do? I've got a college
education to complete here. I have to choose a major, do something important.
So, I went to writing. I really, I felt maybe I had something to say, and I went
ahead and tried it, finished out. I wrote a novel for my graduating thesis,
never published. And that was the point of decision. I had to decide it in order
to finish college. Did decide it. Never regretted it, actually. It turned out,
I've made many wrong decisions. This turned out to be one of the right
decisions. What influenced you to write science fiction instead of mysteries or
porn or romance? What I read was science fiction, it was the one genre that I
was conversant in. From the time I was 13 I first discovered Astounding Science
Fiction Magazine called Astounding in those days, got hooked into it, and what I
did for entertainment, it was science fiction, it was a whole different world,
multiple worlds, each one of them better than the one I knew. And so that when I
thought about writing, I said if I go to some other genre that I'm not familiar
with, I'll make all these mistakes. Whereas in science fiction, I knew that what
I did was original because I had read everything in the field. Now, today you
can't do that. There's so much more published. But back in those days, there was
astounding science fiction. There was galaxy. There was fantasy and science
fiction. And there was amazing stories. And that was about it. That was about
all. You read four monthly or bi-monthly magazines, there was not much in the
paperbacks. They were just starting up then. Valentine Books was just starting a
program with paperback novels, so that it was possible to keep up with the
entire field, and I did, then. So I knew it. I got into what was familiar, and
never left it. As I said now, I tried to leave it, and I'm unable to.
How did you break into science fiction then? You started writing it. How long
did it take you to break in? Okay, I think I answered that. It took me eight
years of writing. Okay. Do you keep up with science fiction now with what's
coming out, or any small fraction of it? I try to. I try to. I'm a slow reader.
I read at about 150 words a minute. It has to do with my education and follow
-ups and so on. I got locked into a slow read I can read faster But when I do I
don't enjoy it And I don't have any retention I don't really understand it So I
have to be very choosy on what I read Because most of my waking time Has taken
up writing And I read slowly So I select, I look at novels I see what's winning
awards I read reviews Try to see what might interest me A lot of what I read is
for research And so I try to keep up But I only read a very, very small fraction
of what's published, and often for perhaps the wrong reasons. I've read one
novel, for example, by Gene Wolfe. I don't know if you're familiar with him. Oh,
I'm very familiar with him. Okay, he's regarded in the brighter circles as one
of the best writers in the genre. Well, that's not why I read the first of his
Torture novels. was because it happened to be running very closely parallel to
one of mine in sales. And I was curious, what is this one that I keep running
next with? You know, what's it like? Is it like mine? So I read it and then
said, hey, this guy is a good writer. But it was that, you might say, that
accidental. I just don't have time to read the whole field. If I know that
somebody's good, I will read to see for myself. But the fact is there are more
good writers now than I can keep up with in many people whose work I would
enjoy, but I just don't have the time to read them, which I regret. Perhaps if I
were a fast reader, but I took a speed reading course once and they didn't know
what they were doing. They didn't teach me anything. So between the limitation
of time and the slowness, I'm always reading something. and I will, in the
course of a year, I'll read 20 or 30 novels. But I know other people, they may
read that much, you know, in a month. Of course, they're not trying to write
novels at the same time. So I try to keep up with the important figures of the
day. And some, June Wolf was one, right now I'm reading a Larry Niven novel
called Dream Park just to keep up with what Larry Niven is doing, because he's
more or less one of my contemporaries. He broke into writing it about the same
time I did. That sort of thing. I wish I were. I can't regard myself as being
well-educated in the field now because of the smallness of the amount that I
read.
Phone was your first novel, as you mentioned, a while ago, and it was pretty
popular. I don't know what the sales were, but it was nominated, was it for both
awards? I know it was for at least one of them. It came in third for the Nebula
and it came in third for the Hugo. Surely that must have helped give you a
boost, just a middle boost for your first novel to do that well. Well, yes and
no. I thought it would, but that was the publisher. That was Valentine Books.
They gave me dishonest reports. I was paid $1,500 for that novel and it had
sales in England and in France and in Holland and they showed me that the novel
was far from earning out its advance. Well, now money was worth more in those
days than now but these days well the last novel I had in the first two months
of publication it earned out $18,000 and I don't think I've changed that much.
They were not giving the honest statements and I got the evidence to prove it
and I didn't well I got the money but I also got blacklisted so that I never had
accurate statistics on how well that did. It may have done well but the sales
statistics I got showed that it sold maybe 45,000 copies and went dead. I don't
believe them, but that's all the evidence I have. Then in the next year's
afterphone, you wrote, I guess the Battle Circle novels were the next ones, or
at least the first couple of those. Is that correct? Yes, the order I wrote them
and the order they were published are not necessarily the same. The first of the
Battle Circle novels was Solved the Rope, and that was done so I could enter a
contest. Pyramid had this $5,000 contest. Good money in those days. I entered
this novel and it won. And then later on, I did a sequel to it, and Pyramid
bounced it. They wrote me this fancy letter saying, we wish we could tell you
how much we like this novel and that we want to publish it, but we don't. And
they sent it back so that it had to be published by a different publisher, who
then rejected the third novel in the series. That was Bantam. And so three
novels there. Finally, Avon got them, put them all together, and it's been
pretty successful ever since. And Nick the Sword never was published by itself
in the States, was it? It was, but it was in England, never in this country.
Bantam Books bought it and wrote it off.
Do you know what I mean by writing it off? Right. They bought it, they paid for
it, and they refused to publish it. Apparently it was too violent for them. It
was a violent novel, although I wish they'd paid attention to the theme, which
was vengeance and the futility of vengeance. I had something to say about
vengeance there, and I feel I did a good job at showing what it's like. If you
live a life that's based on vengeance, this is what it's going to be like. But
nobody ever commented on it. I never got any fan letters. Nobody ever understood
that. And the publisher, having bought it, had to change the editors and wrote
it off. And so I'm glad that Avon finally did put it into print. Macroscope, you
feel, was your first crowning achievement where you thought you had learned to
write novels finally? Yes, after that I was confident that I could do it. It was
195,000 words long. I said, I can do that, I can do any length. And I thought it
was the major novel of my career until I did Tarot. I still regard it as the
second major novel. Did you get fan mail on Macroscope or continue to? Yes, I've
had quite a bit over the years. Many people have written to admire it.
Macroscope had a problem. I thought that if novels like Thone were placing
thirds on the Hugo and the Nebula, what would a novel like Macroscope, which I
regard as a much more important work? It wasn't permitted on the ballot at all.
Yes, I had a lot of trouble.
The publishers would distribute novels to the Science Fiction Writers of
America, SFWA. And I got my publisher, Avon, to agree to distribute this novel
to them so that people could read it. The membership were expecting the novel to
be distributed. the publisher followed up and sent out the novel so that it
arrived about a month after the nominations ballot had closed. I got several
letters from people saying, look, I know this is a great novel. I'll probably
read it and like it and nominate it, but where is it? Well, the publisher had
not distributed it. So that I then wrote to the president of SFWA, who was
Gordon Dixon, and said, Look, I believe that I've written a major novel of my
career. My other ones have been placing high. I feel that if this novel were
given a fair chance to be nominated, it would make the ballot. So it wasn't your
fault that it didn't, but will you permit writing a vote on the ballot since the
ballot was closed? And he wrote back and said no. So I think had they, see, once
it was distributed, people could read it and nominate it, but the nominations
were closed. So if a write-in had been permitted, I think it could have made the
ballot. But Gordon Dixon refused to allow a write-in, and so it was not
permitted to compete. And that's it. It went nowhere. A major novel of the first
decade of my writing existence, it did make the Hugo ballot. It came in third on
the Hugo. The problem there is that for about 10 years, the winner of the Nebula
Bout was almost automatically the winner of the Hugo. And mine was not even on
the Nebula Bout, so a lot of people didn't bother to read it. I'm pleased that
it did come up from nowhere. It was the only novel that made the Hugo Bout that
hadn't been on the Nebula Bout. So it's like, you know, if you were in a race
and everybody else took off and you came in two minutes later on this 100-yard
dash and you have to start to compete, if you get so you can even play, you're
doing pretty well. So I feel that the novel did pretty well considering, and
SFWA published what amounted to an apology for it later on. They had their
collection of Nebula Award winners discussed the novels in them, discussed all
the novels on the ballot, plus one, that is, plus Macroscope, more or less
apologetically, trying to explain why it hadn't been on the ballot. And that was
it. I was not pleased. I felt that they should have permitted a writing ballot
so that my novel had a chance at least to compete, but they did not. Okay. We'll
ask you one last question, then. Why do you use the nom de plume, Piers Anthony,
instead of your real last name. I decided on that before I ever sold a thing.
And it said supposing I write, and just supposing I'm successful, and just
supposing I get to be famous. So all this was an awful lot of supposing. I mean,
I hadn't even sold anything. I'd been trying for several years and hadn't. I'd
heard about writers such as John D. MacDonald, a mystery writer, and he had to
move several times because people would come in and just drop in. They would
assume that he had nothing better to do than to talk with every fan that dropped
in on his address. And so he would have to move so his address would be lost. It
would take him two or three years to find him, and then they'd take up his time
again. Why have this happened to me, if I ever get that well-known? The answer
was to use the pen name. So I set up with the pen name from the outset, and it
has protected me. I get a lot of fan mail. It goes to the publisher. I don't get
many people dropping in on me because they can't find me. They can look up in
the phone book. I don't know, maybe there's somebody locally killed, Anthony,
that keeps getting people dropping in on him. It's not me, you see. So I have
protected myself. If I want someone to know who I am, I can tell them. But the
stranger that just says, Hey, gee, there's this writer, I think I'll drop in on
him, he is unable to find me. And so now I'm beginning to approach the sort of
success that the pseudonym was prepared for. I really never thought I would get
there. It was just saying suppose. And I planned well. I'm having more success
than I really believed I would have. And now my pen name is serving to protect
me, to protect my time, really. Not that I mind talking with people, but, you
know, there would be a lot of people that would just like to come. If there's a
writer there, they won't even have read anything by that author. They say, gee,
that's a writer, I'll go talk to him. But I don't need that sort of thing. I'm
willing to talk to people that have read my works, that want to talk to me, ask
me intelligent questions. People more like you, you see. I'm not willing to talk
to the man off the street who just has heard that I'm a writer. He doesn't even
know what I'm writing about. But if there's a writer, he just wants to go and
talk to him and take up his time. So that's the reason, again, a rather
commercial reason, if you will. but I think effective.
I'm very glad that your plans, your carefully worked out plans, were worth it.
That's nice. I hate to have it sound so negative, but actually now I do need to
protect my time. Of course. Well, sir, we appreciate the time you spent with us.
It's been very enlightening. I hope you can digest it down. Oh, yeah. A lot of
talking here, which is the danger, and you may have trouble getting it down to
your little five-minute segments. Well, that's going to be the hard part, but
again, it's much easier to have to cut and that sort of thing than it is to try
to stretch. Because some people
just are a little bit more reticent. Some of the people that we talk to are
actually a little bit shy, which I can understand and are not confident that
their answers are. I'm not an English teacher. I mean, I've been in front of
classes and so on, so it's not a problem. Okay, great. Well, we sure look
forward to whatever else you put out. Well, I hope it works out, and I hope your
listeners like it. Great. We sure appreciate your talking to us, and we'll get
you copies of the programs. I imagine it'll be about a month and a half or so,
but we will get them to you. And thanks again. Enjoyed it very much. Okay, good
night now.